added draft of release notes for 0.41.x (#68)
usethesource/rascal-website: release-notes/rascal-0-41-x-release-notes.md

---
authors: [jvinju]
title: "Rascal 0.41.x release notes"
sidebar_position: 87
---

In this post we report on the Rascal release 0.41.x

## Release 0.41.0 - September, 2025

Welcome to Rascal 0.41.0! This release comes with great improvements in usability (parse error recovery, loading speed)

> and enormous progress with type-checking and compilation. Numerous additions to the standard library and a _big change_ in the Java language support setup... The release notes are organized by major topics and there is a list of smaller improvements at the end, including a list of linked closed issues and the merged pull requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and enormous progress with type checking and compilation. Numerous additions to the standard library and a _big change_ in the Java language support setup... The release notes are organized by major topics and there is a list of smaller improvements at the end, including a list of linked closed issues and the merged pull requests.
```

Many, if not most, of the improvements to the Rascal project were both funded and executed by Swat.engineering BV. Thanks!

### Analyzing Java code

For many users the extraction of `java-air` as a separate project from `rascal` will be the biggest change. This allows

> us to do faster maintenance cycles on both projects and it more than halfed the size of the binary distribution of the core Rascal features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
us to do faster maintenance cycles on both projects and it more than halved the size of the binary distribution of the core Rascal features.
```

> To regain access to all the beloved features related to parsing, abstract syntax trees, semantic models like `M3`, for the Java language, please add this to your pom.xml dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To regain access to all the beloved features for the Java language related to parsing, abstract syntax trees, and semantic models like `M3`, please add this to your `pom.xml` dependencies:
```

```xml
<dependency>  
    <groupId>org.rascalmpl</groupId>
    <artifactId>java-air</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
</dependency>
```

> Nothing else has changed w.r.t. Java analysis. The same module names, functions as always are present in `lang::java::*` as ever. Java-air currently supports language features up to **JLS-14** and is still based on Eclipse's Java Development Toolkit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nothing else has changed w.r.t. Java analysis. The same module names, functions as always are present in `lang::java::*` as ever. `java-air` currently supports language features up to **JLS-14** and is still based on Eclipse's Java Development Toolkit.
```

> If you are interested in bringing `java-air` up to JSL-17, 19, 21, 23, ...; This is an example of something we welcome help with in the community. Please have a look at https://github.com/usethesource/java-air/. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in bringing `java-air` up to JLS-17, 19, 21, 23, ...; This is an example of something where we welcome help from the community. Please have a look at https://github.com/usethesource/java-air/. 
```

### Parser improvements (the Error Recovery)

The generated parsers now support an "error recovery" mode. In this mode the parser is **robust** against errors in the _input_. This is extremely useful for interactive editing situations, where sometimes a file is under development and we still want syntax-directed and semantics-directed features. Examples of downstream features that can work well with a recovered parse:
* highlighting,

> * type-checking,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* type checking,
```

> * reference resolving, etc.

Reviewer 2: maybe add auto-completion to the list (since that's one that really builds on error recovery)

The recovered parse trees have two new types of `Production`: `skipped` and `error`, where the last contains the original `Production` that was aborted, and the position "dot" were that happened.
The `skipped` production is there to create a type-correct representation of all the characters in the file, including the skipped characters and in the right order. Note that all characters of the input are _always_ represented in the parse tree, with or without errors.

Downstream analyses like syntax highlighting and type checking can simply _ignore_ the error trees, and then they will be reasonably robust against parse errors too.
To make this work Rascal features such as "pattern matching" and "field selection" were extended, making it easy for Rascal programmers to ignore the error trees and focus on the correct trees only. Examples of such features:
* a pattern match on a partially recognized syntactic construct always _fails_, such that the error case is always an orthogonal extra case, or the `default` is executed.

> * if accidentally an error tree does lead to a new run-time exception, then this exception is always wrapped by `ParseErrorRecovery` to indicate that this was the reason. This happens for example if you ask for a field that was part of the skipped characters: NoSuchField is then wrapped by `ParseErrorRecovery` automatically. Programmers can use `try-catch` as high-up in their algorithms as necessary to recover from such problems. 

Reviewer 2: should we also highlight the fact that rewrites are cached if they match on an `amb` node?

> * if accidentally an error tree does lead to a new run-time exception, then this exception is always wrapped by `ParseErrorRecovery` to indicate that this was the reason. This happens for example if you ask for a field that was part of the skipped characters: NoSuchField is then wrapped by `ParseErrorRecovery` automatically. Programmers can use `try-catch` as high-up in their algorithms as necessary to recover from such problems. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* if accidentally an error tree does lead to a new run-time exception, then this exception is always wrapped by `ParseErrorRecovery` to indicate that this was the reason. This happens for example if you ask for a field that was part of the skipped characters: `NoSuchField` is then wrapped by `ParseErrorRecovery` automatically. Programmers can use `try-catch` as high-up in their algorithms as necessary to recover from such problems. 
```

Parse error recovery required significant new extensions to the parsing algorithm, as well as introducing new downstream analyses
of ambiguous parse forests caused by recovering from different parallel stacks. These feature were very well tested on Rascal, Java and C grammars. Nevertheless it can be considered "beta" since not that many users (a few dozen) have tested it out. We hope you will enjoy it! In particular the robustness of syntax highlighting and the possibility of providing semantic feedback on a partially parsed file for your users are interesting.

Other improvements to the parsers:
* Two bugs related to nullables inside regular expressions were solved
* The `@<column>` constraint in grammar rules was fixed. 

> ### Fast Configuration via Maven's pom.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fast Configuration via Maven's `pom.xml`
```

> > *warning* the way Rascal is configured is gradually migrating from using `RASCAL.MF` to using `pom.xml`. Dependencies (Java, Rascal or otherwise) already come from a `pom.xml` file's `<dependencies>` list. Every project should have one, with at least a dependency on the rascal project itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> *warning* the way Rascal is configured is gradually migrating from using `RASCAL.MF` to using `pom.xml`. Dependencies (Java, Rascal or otherwise) already come from a `pom.xml` file's `<dependencies>` list. Every project should have one, with at least a dependency on the Rascal project itself.
```

* `Require-Libraries` in `RASCAL.MF` is no longer in use. You will be warned by the IDE about this.

> * the interpreter is now also configured by pom.xml, just as the compiler. `Sources` still come from `RASCAL.MF` for the interpreter, but not for the checker and the compiler. For now you have to keep `RASCAL.MF` and `pom.xml` in line w.r.t. the configuration of the local source folders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the interpreter is now also configured by `pom.xml`, just like the compiler. `Sources` still come from `RASCAL.MF` for the interpreter, but not for the checker and the compiler. For now you have to keep `RASCAL.MF` and `pom.xml` in line w.r.t. the configuration of the local source folders.
```

* `pom.xml` parsing is done locally and quickly, and so is configuring variables and resolving and downloading dependencies.

> * the version of the bootstrap jar is now an explicit parameter in pom.xml, and it is downloaded automatically when required. Only relevant for developers working on the Rascal project itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the version of the bootstrap jar is now an explicit parameter in `pom.xml`, and it is downloaded automatically when required. Only relevant for developers working on the Rascal project itself.
```

* locations of library dependencies are always normalized to `mvn://` or `jar+file://` such that file access inside a library is always done in the same way and very few clients have to distinguish different cases of `loc` schemes. Normalization
to the `mvn://` scheme also enables debug-stepping through library code with the Rascal debugger.

> * the old `lib://` scheme has completely dissappeared, in favor of `mvn://` which is more precise due to the additional version number and group id. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the old `lib://` scheme has completely disappeared, in favor of `mvn://` which is more precise due to the additional version number and group id. 
```

### REPL/Console improvements

* the REPL consistently prints what its configuration is (versions, source path, classpath, runtime environment, standard library)

> * the REPL was ported from jline2 to **jline3**; with important usability enhancements among which _multiline editing_

Reviewer 2: I would say re-implemented instead of ported.

* the textual progress bar and printing to stderr was improved radically (sometimes prints were lost), also due to the upgrade to jline3
* the REPL starts _much_ faster, due to a re-implementation of the Maven features for acquiring the exact locations of dependencies.

> * module reloading is faster and more accurate on MacOS due to the new File Watchers (see below)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* module reloading is faster and more accurate on macOS due to the new File Watches (see below)
```

* the `:set` options grammar was extended with optional `;`'s and also further implemented
* all other `:` commands are now implemented. See `:help` for instructions. You can now `:undeclare` functions and variables

> without having to restart the REPL, for example. All `:` commands accept accidentally types `;` semicolons at the end now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without having to restart the REPL, for example. All `:` commands accept accidentally typed `;` semicolons at the end now.
```

* An empty line no longer "cancels" a command, so multiline pasted code work better. Instead CTRL+C or simply `;` + ENTER will get you restarted.
* Commandline parsing via keyword parameters of `main` was extended and stabilized. Use `--help` of `-help` on a main
with example keyword parameters to get an idea: `void main(int age=0, str name="")`. Execute by `java -cp rascal.jar org.rascalmpl.shell.RascalShell my::mod::Name --help`. You can also create your own Java class and extend `AbstractCommandlineTool` to call their `main`, given the top module name and a source path. There are some bells and whistles for `PathConfig pcfg` parameters; namely all the individual fields of `PathConfig` will be added to the commandline parameters, and `--project <loc>` is used to call `util::Reflective::getProjectPathConfig` automagically when a `PathConfig` parameter is present.

### File watching

The file watching feature, both the Java and the Rascal API, were re-implemented from scratch based on

> SWAT.engineering's [Java Watch](https://github.com/SWAT-engineering/java-watch). This comes with several enhancements but also 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swat.engineering's [Java Watch](https://github.com/SWAT-engineering/java-watch). This comes with several enhancements but also 
```

serious bug fixes. The stability and efficiency was improved with respect to recursive file watching and deletion and creation
of (recursive) folders under watch. Most importantly file watching now also works effectively on **Mac OSX**, which it didn't before.

The file watching API is important for reloading Rascal modules on the REPL when necessary, but also file-based language
processors (for DLSs) which can do incremental and/or modular analysis or code generation benefit from this feature. See the 
`IO` module for more information.

### Merging the Maven Plugin, Tutor, Checker and the Compiler into the Main Rascal Project

Previously the checker and the compiler resided in the `rascal-core` project because they were experimental. Also

> the rascal-tutor project was separate for faster release cycles in its secpond experimental fase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `rascal-tutor` project was separate for faster release cycles in its second experimental phase.
```

We moved on and merged them all back into the `main` development branch of the [rascal](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal)
project. This improves cohesion and lowers coupling, but most importantly it cuts the bootstrapping release cycles

> between four projects: rascal, rascal-tutor, rascal-maven-plugin and rascal-core. Rascal-tutor and rascal-core have 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between four projects: `rascal`, `rascal-tutor`, `rascal-maven-plugin` and `rascal-core`. `rascal-tutor` and `rascal-core` have 
```

> been _archived_ on github and usethesource.io.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
been _archived_ on GitHub and usethesource.io.
```

All progress in the checker and the compiler is now directly available in the Rascal project. We made sure to 
clone the entire commit history of `rascal-core` into the `rascal` project, for search and attribution purposes.

> Also all complex behaviors in `rascal-maven-plugin` have been moved to commandline tools in the `rascal` project,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also all complex behaviors in `rascal-maven-plugin` have been moved to command-line tools in the `rascal` project,
```

> including parallel type-checking. The maven plugin project is now only a shell which calls the commandline tools from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
including parallel type checking. The maven plugin project is now only a shell which calls the command-line tools from the
```

> released jar. Instead of the rascal version which is configured by the `rascal-maven-plugin` it will use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
released jar. Instead of the Rascal version which is configured by the `rascal-maven-plugin` it will use
```

> the version of rascal described in the pom of the _client_ project. The plugin also prints warnings and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the version of Rascal described in the `pom.xml` of the _client_ project. The plugin also prints warnings and 
```

errors if the versions are out-of-date or inconsistent. This is yet another cyclic bootstrap dependency
removed, since now we don't need a release of `rascal-maven-plugin` to use a new version of `rascal`.

### Merging debugger and other LSP core features into the main Rascal project

To increase cohesion and lower coupling between the `rascal` project and the `rascal-lsp` project

> core features of rascal-lsp are being moved into the rascal project. This is ongoing. Eventually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
core features of `rascal-lsp` are being moved into the `rascal` project. This is ongoing. Eventually
```

> this will make it very easy for the new LSP client (other editors than VScode) to connect to Rascal's LSP,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this will make it very easy for the new LSP client (other editors than VS Code) to connect to Rascal's LSP,
```

including the advanced terminal support and loading LSP extensions for DSLs. 

> Also it lowers our maintenance costs and increases the speed of our release cycles.

Reviewer 2: Highlight that we're working towards decoupling the rascal version of the VS Code version and the one you want to run? as that is one of the other factors. (part of pom.xml leading project)

> * The Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP) implementation (an extension to the Language Service Protocol) was moved to the rascal project.

Reviewer 2: `s/extension/companion/`

> * The Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP) implementation (an extension to the Language Service Protocol) was moved to the rascal project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP) implementation (an extension to the Language Service Protocol) was moved to the Rascal project.
```

### Type checker improvements

* Static analysis of several Rascal constructs was improved, especially when types or functions
are merged due to the `extend` feature: constructors, globals, type parameters of functions, field selection.
* Subtype and lub were improved for corner cases with higher-order functions.
* Several checker issues caused by colliding extended modules were resolved.
* The checker now has an **incremental** mode which is much faster in an IDE context.
* Type inference was strengtened by inheriting more information from the context.
* The checker already worked module-by-module, but now each module is represented by
an _abstract interface_ consisting only of logical fully qualified names of declared items (also represented by `loc`). This
enables "binary backward compatibility" where an existing binary (.tpl and/or .class file) from a library 
can still be linked and loaded with newer client code, and even newer binary libraries can be linked and loaded with older
client binaries as long as the aforementioned interface hasn't changed too much. We are documenting when and how interfaces

> change, and what kind of action is required from a client under which changes to a library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change, and what kind of action is required from a client depending on the kind of changes to a library.
```

* The checker analyzes whether a binary library is (still) compatible and produces diagnostic information if not.

> * The whole checker is now tested incrementally on a selected set of external Rascal libraries and programs, and the rascal project itself, for regressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The whole checker is now tested incrementally on a selected set of external Rascal libraries and programs, and the Rascal project itself, for regressions.
```

> * Character classes fully supported, in line with the semantics of the interpreter where `char(10)` has the dynamic type `[\n]`. The checker now assumes any `char(_)` term has type `![] + [\0]`. Sub-typing for character classes is sub-classing, `lub` is class union and `glb` is class intersection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Character classes are now fully supported, in line with the semantics of the interpreter where `char(10)` has the dynamic type `[\n]`. The checker now assumes any `char(_)` term has type `![] + [\0]`. Subtyping for character classes is subclassing, `lub` is class union and `glb` is class intersection.
```

> * Any type like `tuple[int,void]` is considered equivalent to `void` in _all circumstances_ (also as return types). Since tuple instances with void fields do not exist, any such type is "void" of values. The canonical type that represents the empry set of values is `void`. Same for function type parameters: `int (void, int)` is equivalent to `void` for the same reason as above. Functions with `void` parameters do not exist in Rascal, hence such type terms are canonically reduced to `void`. This reduction to one simple case is essential for downstream analyses. For example,  the static checking of assignments and return values (where `void` is treated exceptionally). Another example is the semantics of dynamic dispatch where a `void` return type produced by the dynamic instantiation of type variables will lead to overload application failure (`CallFailed`) and/or backtracking. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Any type like `tuple[int, void]` is considered equivalent to `void` in _all circumstances_ (also as return types). Since tuple instances with void fields do not exist, any such type is "void" of values. The canonical type that represents the empty set of values is `void`. The same holds for function type parameters: `int (void, int)` is equivalent to `void` for the same reason. Functions with `void` parameters do not exist in Rascal, hence such type terms are canonically reduced to `void`. This reduction to one simple case is essential for downstream analyses --- for example, the static checking of assignments and return values (where `void` is treated exceptionally). Another example is the semantics of dynamic dispatch where a `void` return type produced by the dynamic instantiation of type variables will lead to overload application failure (`CallFailed`) and/or backtracking. 
```

* the implementation of the extend feature as well as the related overloading resolution were overhauled completely. 

### Tutor improvements

> * tutor indexing and compilation was made incremental per markdown file, documentation folder and Rascal module. If modules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* tutor indexing and compilation was made incremental per Markdown file, documentation folder and Rascal module. If modules
```

are removed from a project or renamed, the incrementally constructed index in `target/classes/docs/index.value` is _not_
automatically invalidated. Only removing that file (`mvn clean`) will uncover all possible linking errors introduced
by the removal/renaming. Otherwise only modules which have been edited will be re-documented. Old errors in unchanged
modules are always reported again with each incremental run.

> * added progress bar for loading indices and compiling markdown code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* added progress bar for loading indices and compiling Markdown code.
```

* added optional author lists to a package's presentation.
* better error handling around the screenshot feature.
* added a call-out feature
* added `rascal-declaration` blocks, which show as simple highlighted top-level declarations in the documentation, but are
declared in the currently running REPL as a side-effect for later use.
* show issue tracker location on the main page
* modules called `demo*` (case insensitive) or modules nested under packages called `demo` are presented differently than normal modules. Their tests are always shown fully and the bodies of all functions are expanded fully in the documentation.
* if a code block expects errors but no errors are reported, this is now flagged as an error.
* added citations and funding to the main page of a package (not optional)
* ambiguous link errors now propose a minimal amount of _exact_ and _shortest_ solutions for chosing one of the current alternatives.

### Standard Library Maintenance

> * `lang::java::{m3,flow,syntax,tests}::*` were all moved to the `java-air` project. This also removes the pom.xml dependencies on the Eclipse JDT and OW2 ASM libraries. All functionality was ported as-is to the other project. Module and package

Reviewer 2: repeat link to java-air project

> * `lang::java::{m3,flow,syntax,tests}::*` were all moved to the `java-air` project. This also removes the pom.xml dependencies on the Eclipse JDT and OW2 ASM libraries. All functionality was ported as-is to the other project. Module and package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `lang::java::{m3,flow,syntax,tests}::*` were all moved to the `java-air` project. This also removes the `pom.xml` dependencies on the Eclipse JDT and OW2 ASM libraries. All functionality was ported as-is to the other project. Module and package
```

names have remained the same and so have internal Java-based mapping code classes and packages.

>    * Now you have to add a dependency in your pom file on `java-air` (see above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Now you have to add a dependency in your `pom.xml` file on `java-air` (see above).
```

>    * Java-air is expected to release more often in one year, namely adding support for JLS >14 versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * `java-air` is expected to release more often in one year, namely adding support for JLS >14 versions.
```

   * Please report Java analysis issues with the `java-air` project from now on, where appropriate.

>    * All existing issues have been moved to the new repository on github

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * All existing issues have been moved to the new repository on GitHub
```

> * `analysis::text::search::*` was extracted into a separate library: [rascal-lucene](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal-lucene). This lucene-based two-way integration with Rascal offers _very fast_ (approximate or exact) text indexing and search facilities. It integrates with Rascal's grammars and parsing features and functions, to create syntax-directed and semantics-directed indexing features for programming languages, domain specific languages as well as their comments and documentation. It was separated to allow for independent evolution as well as to reduce the binary deployment footprint and (transitive) dependency list of the core rascal project. Example application areas: IDEs with documentation search features, feature location applications, requirements engineering, software maintenance and evolution. All applications were quick access to _relevant_ documents or code is essential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `analysis::text::search::*` was extracted into a separate library: [rascal-lucene](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal-lucene). This lucene-based two-way integration with Rascal offers _very fast_ (approximate or exact) text indexing and search facilities. It integrates with Rascal's grammars and parsing features and functions, to create syntax-directed and semantics-directed indexing features for programming languages, domain-specific languages as well as their comments and documentation. It was separated to allow for independent evolution as well as to reduce the binary deployment footprint and (transitive) dependency list of the core Rascal project. Example application areas include IDEs with documentation search features, feature location applications, requirements engineering, software maintenance and evolution --- all applications where quick access to _relevant_ documents or code is essential.
```

* `lang::xml::IO` was extended with a _streaming_ API for XML nodes in very large but repetitive documents. See the `streamXML` function. 

> * duplicate overloads, present due to the exact same functions being extended from different directions in the extend graph, were eliminated. This greatly affects the efficiency of functions with only a few overloads, when the high count was caused by "diamond-shaped" extend graphs. Otherwise it doesn't do much for efficiency.

Reviewer 2: is this a stdlib thing? looks more to fit a different category

Author: right!

* `Type` was cleaned up radically. The cloned implementations of subtype, lub, glb, intersects now directly call their native Java implementations via "unreification". The resulting Types of lub and glb are then "reified" as values again and returned to the caller. Extensive specification-based tests were added to document the formal properties of the type system (it's a _finite lattice_.)

> And `lrel` and `rel` were completely removed from the `Symbol` representation, as these are always normalized to `list[tuple[...]]` and `set[tuple[...]]`. `bag` was also removed because we never implemented it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`lrel` and `rel` were completely removed from the `Symbol` representation, as these are always normalized to `list[tuple[...]]` and `set[tuple[...]]`. `bag` was also removed because we never implemented it.
```

> * the `PathConfig` type was cleaned up and factored into its own module `util::PathConfig`. It will serve as the common intermediate representation between configuration code (Maven, VScode, Eclipse) and file-based language processors. `PathConfig` now also has a `messages` field where errors and warnings detected during configuration steps can be communicated to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the `PathConfig` type was cleaned up and factored into its own module `util::PathConfig`. It will serve as the common intermediate representation between configuration code (Maven, VS Code, Eclipse) and file-based language processors. `PathConfig` now also has a `messages` field where errors and warnings detected during configuration steps can be communicated to the user.
```

* `Box2Text` was optimized, including more fixes to making arrays (tables) more robust. Empty H, V, HV and HOV boxes are now always removed before outlining, to avoid spurious spacing.

> * `analysis::diff::edits::HifiTreeDiff` and  `analysis::diff::edits::HifiLayoutDiff` were added. The first computes `TextEdit` by looking at the differences between an original tree and a rewritten tree. The algorithm tries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `analysis::diff::edits::HifiTreeDiff` and `analysis::diff::edits::HifiLayoutDiff` were added. The first computes `TextEdit` by looking at the differences between an original tree and a rewritten tree. The algorithm tries
```

> to maintain as much accidental whitespace, indentation and comments from the original as possible. The second does the same where the rewritten tree is a _formatted_ version of the original. A minimum sets of whitespace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to maintain as much accidental whitespace, indentation and comments from the original as possible. The second does the same where the rewritten tree is a _formatted_ version of the original. A minimum set of whitespace
```

edits are computed such that the formatting is executed as defined, while it also tries to recover comments as much as possible from the original. Both algorithms are keystones of source-to-source transformation pipelines
for syntax- and semantics-directed features in IDEs.

> * `HiFiLayoutDiff` can map all case insensitive literals to all lowercase, all UPPERCASE, Capitalized or as originally printed, or as formatted by `toBox` (five modes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `HiFiLayoutDiff` can map all case-insensitive literals to all lowercase, all UPPERCASE, Capitalized or as originally printed, or as formatted by `toBox` (five modes).
```

* `toBox` no longer implements comment preservation (badly) because this is now covered by `HiFiLayoutDiff` (excellently).
* Added `ParseTree::reposition` function which has all the bells and whistles to add and remove `src` annotations on `Tree` nodes. Can be used to decrease the memory footprint of full parse trees without removing syntactic information,
but also to add position information where it previously wasn't for more accurate analyses.

> * `IO` now has full `stat` capabilities, also on the Java API side in URIResolverRegistry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `IO` now has full `stat` capabilities, also on the Java API side in `URIResolverRegistry`.
```

> * renamed `DocumentEdit` to `FileChange`, and also factored the concept into its own module. documented it and renamed some functions for the sake of consistency. top-level function names have been kept with @deprecated tags. Also `DocumentEdit` was aliased to the new name `FileChange` for backward compatibility in Rascal code (this does not help for Java code).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* renamed `DocumentEdit` to `FileSystemChange`, and also factored the concept into its own module. documented it and renamed some functions for the sake of consistency; top-level function names have been kept with `@deprecated` tags. Also `DocumentEdit` was aliased to the new name `FileSystemChange` for backward compatibility in Rascal code (this does not help for Java code).
```

> * `Message` now has a default way of printing messages, `writeMessages`, and a default way of reporting messages in `main` functions, featuring the correct return value (0 for no errors, not 0 for errors), and the interpretation of `errorsAsWarnings` and `warningsAsErrors`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Message` now has a default way of printing messages, `writeMessages`, and a default way of reporting messages in `main` functions, featuring the correct return value (`0` for no errors, non-`0` for errors), and the interpretation of `errorsAsWarnings` and `warningsAsErrors`.
```

* `Message` has `causes` now, where additional information about how an error or warning came to be can be linked. These are unfoldable in the diagnostics view of your IDE, and they are printed with each error on the console.

> * In `IDEServices`, `Message` has `fixes` now where you can register `CodeAction` (quickfixes) for the error that was introduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In `IDEServices`, `Message` has `fixes` now where you can register `CodeAction` (quick fixes) for the error that was introduced.
```

> These fixes are picked up by the LSP server and integrated into VScode's diagnostics view. They are ignored when printing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These fixes are picked up by the LSP server and integrated into VS Code's Diagnostics view. They are ignored when printing
```

> a Message to the console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a `Message` to the console.
```

* `IO::watch` now uses the constructors from `analysis::diff::edits::FileSystemChange` to report updates to files.
* `String::indent` was added; which exposes the internal lazy and linear implementation of string indentation. Very fast.

> * `lang::rascal::viz::ImportGraph` contains an experimental visualization of the import and extend graph. Reads the information from the files directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `lang::rascal::vis::ImportGraph` contains an experimental visualization of the import and extend graph. It reads the information from the files directly.
```

* `IO` adds base32 support

> * The documentation of the library was improved in dozens of modules; typos, old explanations, forgotten features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The documentation of the standard library was improved in dozens of modules; typos, old explanations, forgotten features.
```

> * `IO` adds "capabilities" support (which are not permissions), telling you based on the locations scheme and file 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `IO` adds "capabilities" support (which are not permissions), telling you based on a location's scheme and file 
```

> if you can read, write, load classes, etc. from this location or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whether you can read, write, load classes, etc. from this location or not.
```

* The use of production `@category` tags for syntax highlighting (see `ParseTree`) were made consistent with the token categories

> for the Language Service Protocol and VScode, all over the standard library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the Language Service Protocol and VS Code, all over the standard library.
```

> * The new module `lang::java::Compiler` contains access to the open-jdk Java compiler from Rascal, fully supporting any `loc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The new module `lang::java::Compiler` contains access to the OpenJDK Java compiler from Rascal, fully supporting any `loc`-based
```

> based file-system for sources, targets and libraries. Configured using `util::PathConfig`. This is useful for DSL compilers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file system for sources, targets and libraries, configurable using `util::PathConfig`. This is useful for DSL compilers
```

> that generate Java code as an intermediate language. Use an in memory filesystem (`memory://my-file-system/`), for example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that generate Java code as an intermediate language. Use an in-memory file system (`memory://my-file-system/`), for example,
```

> for very fast compilation times and easy clean up, under-the-hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for very fast compilation times and easy clean-up, under-the-hood.
```

* The new module `lang::java::Runner` makes it possible to execute any `main` method in any compiled JVM class, as well as 

> running the test methods of any `JUnit` class. The classpath is configured as a `list[loc]`. In particular working with `mvn://` locs is effective (fast) this way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
running the test methods of any `JUnit` class. The classpath is configured as a `list[loc]`. In particular working with `mvn://` locations is effective (fast) this way.
```

* `util::Monitor::job` now throws a useful exception rather than `CallFailed` if the function or closure that is passed accidentally returns `void` (which is _not_ allowed).

> * A number of features were added to `lang::json::IO` which also impact `Content` servers and `util::WebServer` positively and `util::LanguageServer`. We can now print certain `data` types to string, just-in-time before serializing to JSON, and also parse that data back when it comes back from a web client (for example). Also it's possible to make all constructors explicit or just their data types as the first field of an object: `{ _type="Expression" }`. This comes in handy sometimes on the Typescript or Javascript side of things. On the way back, these fields are used for validation purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A number of features were added to `lang::json::IO` which also impact `Content` servers and `util::WebServer` positively and `util::LanguageServer`. We can now print certain `data` types to string, just-in-time before serializing to JSON, and also parse that data back when it comes back from a web client (for example). Also it's possible to make all constructors explicit or just their data types as the first field of an object: `{ _type="Expression" }`. This comes in handy sometimes on the TypeScript or JavaScript side of things. On the way back, these fields are used for validation purposes.
```

* Parse error reporting in `lang::json::IO` was radically improved, and origin locations along with them (they use the same internal administration of parsing positions).
* `lang::json::IO` now supports mapping `null` to Rascal and back in different ways: it writes nothing at all (not even the key) for absent keyword parameters, and for `Maybe[void]::nothing()` it writes `null`. On the way back `null` becomes `Maybe[void]::nothing()` if a `Maybe[&T]` was expected, and keyword parameters are not bound if the value with a key was `null`. Also `null` elements in arrays are skipped. So if `null`s are expected in the input, use `Maybe[&T]` or keyword fields with defaults to model those on the Rascal side. 
* `lang::json::IO` squeezes arbitrary precision `real`'s into JSON's floats. Integers are kept as-is, because JSON supports
any integer and does not have overflow. Of course on the client side you will still have to deal with overflow when the number
is bound to a field or variable.
* `lang::json::IO`'s eight year old deprecated functions have finally been removed completely.

> * `Content` server now serves long (html or json) strings using a the internal concat/indent stream. This halfs the memory 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Content` server now serves long (HTML or JSON) strings using the internal concat/indent stream. This halves the memory 
```

consumption for large files, and still uses the fast internal streaming `Reader` on the implementations of `IString`. Also
large files can now already be received and consumed by the client, in parallel, while the Rascal server is still sending. This has a positive effect on response times on the client side for web applications on the REPL with `Content`, using `util::Webserver` and the Language Service Protocol with `util::LanguageServer`.

### Other Rascal Interpreter changes

> * Throwing and catching StackOverflow and OutOfMemory is possible again, due to not triggered OutOfMemory or StackOverflow during the handling of these exceptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Throwing and catching `StackOverflow` and `OutOfMemory` is possible again, due to not triggering `OutOfMemory` or `StackOverflow` during the handling of these exceptions.
```

> * The `visit` statement now _always_ memoizes amb clusters; this brings down the worst-case complexity of a visit with nested ambiguity to polynomial numbers (instead of the previous exponential amounts of nested combinations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `visit` statement now _always_ memoizes `amb` clusters; this brings down the worst-case complexity of a visit with nested ambiguity to polynomial numbers (instead of the previous exponential amounts of nested combinations).
```

### Merged Pull Requests since version 0.40.0

The following list gives access to detailed progress and discussions regarding this progress. If you are interested in

> contributing to Rascal than we'd use the "pull request" model together like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contributing to Rascal then we'd use the "pull request" model together like this:
```

* [#2396](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2396) - Reducing path config messages for compiler mode
* [#2398](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2398) - Always print messages to console, not to the monitor
* [#2403](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2403) - Switching to a dedicated mirror of uts, that skips cloudflare
* [#2402](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2402) - Fix typo in error message
* [#2404](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2404) - Improved test such that they do not have to download 60mb and respect settings.xml
* [#2401](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2401) - Port ColumnMaps changes from rascal-lsp to rascal
* [#2409](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2409) - Removed "watch" functionality of old compiler version
* [#2406](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2406) - Removing extend cycle
* [#2393](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2393) - Switching to release of rascal that includes the new typechecker changes
* [#2411](https://github.com/usethesource/rascal/pull/2411) - Fixed type error

### Fixed issues since version 0.40.0

> The following list of bugs, enhancements and other issues were registered with the rascal project and solved in the time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following list of bugs, enhancements and other issues were registered with the Rascal project and solved in the time
```
